Plan declarations

A declaration edits only the Entities listed under issues and groups. It fully
declares their titles, descriptions, parents, and outgoing dependencies.
Omitting an Entity does not delete it or change it in the DB.

Create a new plan
  axon docs declaration --example > plan.yml
  Edit the example's titles, descriptions, and relationships for your plan.
  In an initialized management root (axon init), run:
  axon import prepare plan.yml
  axon import check plan.yml
  axon import apply plan.yml
  axon import check plan.yml

  prepare assigns final IDs and rewrites the file as canonical YAML without
  changing Entity data in the DB. check validates and previews the changes.
  apply repeats validation, commits the plan atomically, and refreshes the file's
  fingerprints and observed snapshots. The final check should report no changes.
  New Entities are registered as Accepted / NotStarted / Always without a claim.
  Starting a Group or Issue is a separate, explicit operation.

  docs and --example do not open a DB, register Entities, or start work. They
  need no management root, network connection, or source checkout. Import commands
  do open the DB and can automatically migrate an old supported schema first.

Required fields
  schema: axon-plan/v2
  issues and groups: lists of complete Entity records, even when empty.
  Each record requires id, key, base, title, description, and observed.
  title is non-empty and single-line; description is text or null.

  id: the public Entity ID; null for a new Entity before prepare.
  key: a file-local alias, required for a new Entity before prepare. It matches
       ^[a-z][a-z0-9-]{0,63}$ and is unique across issues and groups.
       Keys are not saved in the DB. Relations can use { key: alias }.
  base: null for an unapplied new Entity; an exported fingerprint for an existing
        Entity. It detects stale snapshots and is not computed from your edits.

  observed is required. For every new Entity it must be exactly:
    progress: not_started
    claim: null
    disposition: accepted
    resurface:
      kind: always

  For existing Entities, observed is the exported read-only Control state,
  not a request to change it. Use ordinary state commands for those changes.

  relations requires editable and readonly mappings, each with parents and
  dependencies lists. Keep all four lists, using [] when empty.
  A parent edge has child and parent references; the child owns the edge.
  A dependency has dependent and prerequisite references; the dependent owns it.
  Each reference is exactly { key: alias } or { id: public-id }.
  An omitted editable edge removes that parent or outgoing dependency from its
  listed owner. readonly edges belong to Entities outside the edit set.

  references requires an entities list, using [] when empty. External Entity
  snapshots must match export; readonly relations preserve external owners.
  Add/remove required snapshots when owned relations change (see below).
  Do not omit required fields or empty structures. Unknown fields are rejected.

Edit existing Entities
  Start from axon export <ID>... or axon export --group <GROUP> --recursive.
  Never invent existing IDs, base fingerprints, observed state, or reference
  snapshots. A stale snapshot is rejected instead of merging concurrent changes.
  Accepted and Rejected declarations are fixed. Before changing one, explicitly
  use axon decide undecide <ID> -r <reason>, then export a fresh snapshot, edit,
  prepare, check, apply, and check again. Inspect the full result and make the
  intended Disposition decision separately; import does not make it for you.

Reference an existing dependency or parent without editing it
  Unlike --example, this procedure needs real snapshots from the active DB.
  Keep your destination plan separate from these source exports:
    axon export <PREREQUISITE-ID> > prerequisite.yml
    axon export <PARENT-GROUP-ID> > parent.yml
  Check each export succeeded. Select the exact record under issues or groups.
  Copy id, base, title and the complete observed mapping to references.entities
  in your destination; add kind: issue or kind: group according to its source
  list. Do not copy key or description. Never fabricate a fingerprint or state.
  Do not add these external Entities to destination issues/groups.

  For example, starting from --example, add the following edges to the existing
  editable lists (replace placeholders with the exported full IDs):
    parents:
      - child: { key: feature }
        parent: { id: <PARENT-GROUP-ID> }
    dependencies:
      - dependent: { key: implement }
        prerequisite: { id: <PREREQUISITE-ID> }
  Preserve the example's other edges. These snippets are not complete YAML and
  are not applicable until real IDs and reference snapshots have been supplied.

  For an existing Undecided owner, first export only the intended edit set;
  add or replace its editable parent/dependency edge in the same way. Parent
  ownership is the child; dependency ownership is the dependent. A fixed
  external parent or prerequisite need not be made Undecided to receive an edge.
  references do not request changes to the external Entity's title or state.

  Include each required external snapshot once. If an included observed state
  uses after_entity, include its target snapshot too, recursively, unless that
  target is already in issues/groups. Source exports provide these snapshots;
  reuse their references.entities records only when required by the destination.
  Do not copy source editable/readonly relations wholesale: destination readonly
  edges are incoming edges owned outside its edit set, not outgoing edges of a
  referenced Entity. Preserve those returned by the destination's own export.
  Remove snapshots no longer required by destination relations or this recursive
  AfterEntity closure; unrelated snapshots are rejected.

  Run prepare, check, apply, then check on the destination as above. Review the
  edit set and changes before apply; final check must report no changes. Compare
  source exports again to verify external declaration/Control values are intact
  (exports may gain readonly incoming edges from the new owner).

  A missing file ID means a missing declaration/reference record, not proof of
  DB absence. Inspect the ID and export its real snapshot. DB absence is reported
  separately; check the active root with axon list --skip-command-evaluation.
  A mismatched reference base may be stale or incorrect: preserve the file,
  compare a fresh export, and reconcile it. With a matching base, mismatched
  kind/title/observed is a read-only snapshot mismatch; restore exported values.

The authoritative schema is docs/reference/declaration-file.md in the axon
source distribution. This built-in guide and example are available offline.
