Axon concepts

An Entity is an Issue or a Group. Both share one lifecycle and one ID namespace.
Generated IDs have a management-root prefix and eight random characters; older
six-character IDs stay valid. A unique suffix works wherever a command takes an
Entity ID. Note IDs are complete record IDs (the BLAKE3 hash of the record); they
do not indicate priority or order.

Lifecycle
  capture -> Undecided -> accept -> NotStarted -> start -> InProgress -> complete -> Completed
  capture registers work: --kind issue|group chooses the kind, and --accept
  registers it as already adopted, in NotStarted instead of Undecided.
  withdraw returns NotStarted to Undecided; release returns InProgress to NotStarted.
  cancel terminates unfinished work; reconsider returns Cancelled to Undecided.
  reopen returns Completed to NotStarted unless a Completed dependent remains.
  Notes can be appended even after work is terminal.
  convert ID --kind issue|group changes the kind of an Undecided or NotStarted
  Entity (release an InProgress Issue first; a Group with children stays a
  Group) and nothing else. A Group's description states its overall outcomes
  and what its final review confirms, so reread it after converting. The
  kind is not a lifecycle transition; -r/--reason can explain the conversion.

A Group is never started or released. A NotStarted Group is InProgress while a direct
child is InProgress or Completed (a NotStarted child Group passes this up from its own
children); its saved lifecycle stays NotStarted until it completes.
An Issue starts only when every ancestor Group is adopted (NotStarted) and the
explicit dependencies of the Issue and of its ancestors are Completed. Completing an
Issue or Group requires the explicit dependencies of that Issue or Group itself to be
Completed and every ancestor Group to be adopted; explicit dependencies of ancestors
are not a prerequisite of its completion. Cancelled is terminal but does not satisfy
a dependency. Group completion requires all direct children to be terminal; an empty
Group completes as well. Running complete on a Group explicitly confirms final
review of the outcomes of the Group and all its descendants, including their Notes.
list, tasks and show show a Group as Empty, Confirmable, Ready, InProgress or
Blocked, and show explains a stalled Group under Stalled, including candidates
that do not surface and the Group's own unsatisfied condition.
parent set ID --parent G sets or moves the parent Group and parent unset ID
removes it; neither changes lifecycle.

Labels
  Every Entity has exactly one label that classifies the kind of work. capture
  requires --label, and label set ID VALUE changes it; there is no unset. The set
  is fixed:
    bug       fix behavior that differs from what is expected
    feat      add new behavior or a feature
    chore     maintenance that changes no behavior: dependencies, CI, settings
    docs      documents, help or skills
    test      add or reorganize tests
    refactor  reorganize structure without changing behavior
    spike     investigate in order to decide: open questions, specifications, plans
  A Group's label is the main kind of work across the Group and is not derived
  from its children. A label is not a priority: it changes no lifecycle rule,
  candidate list or situation. Like the title and description, it is fixed once the Entity
  is Completed or Cancelled. convert keeps the label.

Daily workflow
  axon capture --label spike --title 'Investigate a concern' -m 'Context and uncertainty'
  axon capture --accept --label feat --title 'Deliver an adopted outcome' -F plan.md
  axon capture --kind group --accept --label feat --title 'Deliver a plan' -F plan.md
  axon proposals
  axon tasks
  axon show ID
  axon start ID
  axon note add ID -F result.md
  axon complete ID

Reading and resurfacing
  proposals lists surfaced Undecided work. tasks lists surfaced NotStarted work,
  InProgress Issues and the Groups above them, including blocked work. A Group
  with no InProgress Issue below it is listed only when it surfaces. Candidate
  conditions include every ancestor Group. Absence from these lists does not mean
  an Entity is missing.
  Each row is ID, kind, situation, label and title.
  list includes every saved Entity by default, in creation order. --kind, --label,
  --lifecycle, --terminal and --search narrow it without running conditions;
  tasks and proposals take --kind, --label and --search. Filters combine with AND.
  list/tasks/proposals --search match only current title and description, not Notes.
  On a terminal, list/tasks/proposals rows and the show tree line up their columns
  and wrap long titles inside the title column. Piped output keeps one row per line
  with columns joined by two spaces.
  Use note search 'text' for information in Notes across all Entities, including
  Completed and Cancelled work, without running conditions. Matching is literal,
  case-sensitive, with no trimming or Unicode normalization. Empty queries are
  syntax errors; no matches produces empty stdout and a stderr hint with exit 0.
  Each Note occupies one line with complete Entity/Note IDs, local time and offset,
  and Excerpt: around the first match (24 characters before/after, full query).
  An ellipsis marks omitted text; newlines, backslashes and controls are escaped.
  Entities keep creation order and Notes keep time order. No extra filters or
  fixed-column format are provided. Read the original with note show ID NOTE_ID.
  show reads the saved text, unmet prerequisites and all Group descendants as a tree.
  Like tasks, show runs the conditions the situation of a NotStarted Entity needs: the
  ancestors, the Entity and, for a Group, its startable descendants; other Entities run
  nothing. A NotStarted Issue that does not surface is Unsurfaced. show --skip-conditions
  runs nothing and treats every condition as satisfied; use it to read saved information
  only.
  show --details includes saved conditions and all direct relationships once.
  note list ID requires an Entity ID and reads full Notes in time order; note show
  ID NOTE_ID reads one Note. log reads the records of an Entity: state changes,
  edits, label, relationship and condition changes, kind conversions (shown with the kind
  before and after) and resolutions, preserving concurrent branches and marking
  records whose parent record is missing. --recorder-details includes optional
  stored recorder data; actor information is not ownership.

  condition set ID --command 'test -f ready.txt' stores a shell condition without
  running it. condition unset removes it. proposals/tasks/show run /bin/sh -c: 0=satisfied,
  1=unsatisfied, other exits fail the list or the display. The default timeout is 30s;
  --condition-timeout accepts positive integers with ms, s, m or h.
  --trace-conditions writes captured output to stderr. Conditions run at the
  current Git worktree root (management root outside Git). Filtering selects
  candidates before evaluating their ancestors.

Storage and recovery
  The store is a set of immutable records, one file per record under
  .axon/records/, plus .axon/header.json. Current values are derived from the
  records on every read. When the store is tracked, the committed records are the
  state of that commit; uncommitted record files stay untracked across checkout,
  reset and stash, so commit them or remove them with git clean first.
  init creates a new management root: .axon/records/, .axon/header.json, an
  .axon/.gitignore that excludes only locks and temporary files, and an
  .axon/.gitattributes holding only "* -text". A record's ID is the hash of its
  bytes, so that line keeps Git line-ending conversion (core.autocrlf, eol) from
  turning record files into corruption; it sets no merge or union attributes.
  init does not add the file to an existing store. For a tracked store without
  it, commit the file alone from the management root:
    printf '* -text\n' > .axon/.gitattributes
    git add .axon/.gitattributes
    git commit -m 'Stop line-ending conversion of the Axon store' -- .axon/.gitattributes
  Then, in every clone and worktree that uses the store (also one whose records
  were converted although the file exists), stop Axon and take the tracked
  files out of the index again from the management root:
    git ls-files -z -- .axon | xargs -0 rm --
    git checkout -- .axon
    git ls-files --eol -- .axon
  Never stage record files Git already converted (git add .axon, git add -A,
  commit -a or stash would commit the CRLF bytes for every clone); the last
  line must show i/lf and w/lf for every file. The storage guide
  (docs/guide/storage.md) explains the cases where w/crlf or i/crlf remains.
  Apart from its lock file init writes nothing outside .axon/. One storage
  format; no option selects the format or the location.
  init PREFIX sets the ID prefix: ASCII lowercase letters, digits and hyphens,
  starting and ending with a letter or digit. Without PREFIX, init lowercases the
  management root directory name and fails if that is not a valid prefix.
  Inside Git the store is untracked until you either ignore .axon/ yourself or
  track it with git add .axon; do not mix the two ways in one repository. Init
  never creates or edits the repository root's .gitignore, .gitattributes or
  Git config, and does not stage or commit. Git merges, rebases and cherry-picks
  records from both sides without merge attributes or configuration; Axon is
  not invoked during Git operations.
  Inside Git, discovery takes the current worktree root's .axon, then the
  main worktree's .axon, so linked worktrees without one of their own use
  that store. Git replaces an ignored store without warning when you check
  out or merge a commit that tracks it. Outside Git, the nearest management
  root is used. Corrupt record files and unmerged index entries are errors; no
  fallback or automatic conversion runs. A record file that is its record with
  CRLF line endings is reported as such, with a hint that Git converted it and a
  pointer to the storage guide; the file is not repaired.
  help, docs, actor, completion and version do not require a store.

  Preserve retained artifacts on errors. Applied, Not applied and Result unknown
  describe persistence boundaries. After an unknown result, wait for the original
  writer to finish and inspect saved records before retrying. Creation and
  Note addition are not idempotent. Do not delete locks to bypass another writer.
  After integrating branches, storage check reports corrupt files, conflicted
  Entities (several head records), structural violations and missing parent
  records, and exits non-zero for the first three. While any Entity is conflicted, the
  store accepts only resolve and note add; resolve ID --head RECORD_ID picks one
  head. Remaining violations are repaired with ordinary commands such as reopen,
  parent unset and dep rm. Undo Axon state with lifecycle commands, not git
  revert: reverting a commit only removes record files, and later records that
  depend on them are left with a missing parent.

Use axon help <COMMAND PATH> for exact arguments. Create with --title and --label. A title is one line of
at most 200 characters and a --reason one line of at most 500; longer or multi-line text
belongs in the description or a Note. Descriptions
accept -m/--description or -F/--file (- reads stdin). Notes use
-m/--message or -F/--file. Short flags select inline (-m) or file (-F) input;
inline long names identify the field (--description or --message). For option
values beginning with a hyphen use the equals form, for example --description='--text'.

Optional -r/--reason accompanies lifecycle transitions, resolve --head, write,
label set, parent set|unset, dep add|rm, condition set|unset and convert. It is
validated and saved with the operation, not as a separate Note. On No changes,
no record or reason is saved; a supplied reason is reported as not saved.
Use note add to record a reason alone. Keep the current work definition in the
description, supporting details in Notes and the operation's decision in reason.
A reason does not replace the description's active constraints or decisions.
Capture (including --accept), note add and import apply have no reason input;
registration purposes belong in the description and Note purposes in the Note.
Current log output includes saved reasons on all displayed record kinds,
including creation and import, and excludes Notes. These presentation choices
may change when history is redesigned; they do not provide before/after diffs.

Use axon docs declaration for YAML declaration fields and the bulk-edit workflow.
Use axon docs declaration --example for a new-plan YAML template.

ANSI decoration is disabled per stream when it is not a terminal, or for all
output with a non-empty NO_COLOR, TERM=dumb or the global --no-color flag.
An empty NO_COLOR allows decoration. Export, completion and declaration examples
are always unstyled.
